ホームページSearch this siteEmbedded FilesSkip to main contentSkip to navigation東京確率論セミナー (TPS)日時：月曜日，16:00～17:30 場所： 東京大学大学院数理科学研究科　数理科学研究科棟（駒場）１２６号室※　日時・場所・講演形式（対面またはオンライン）は変更される場合がありますので，念のため各セミナーの項目をご確認ください．【幹事】佐々田槙子（東京大学大学院数理科学研究科）中島秀太（慶應義塾大学理工学部）星野壮登（東京科学大学理学院数学系）※　講演募集は随時行っていますので、何かございましたら、幹事にご連絡ください。メーリングリストの「新規登録／登録アドレス変更／登録アドレス抹消」等は日本大学の西川貴雄先生にご連絡ください。今後の予定※　今後の予定はこちら（服部哲弥氏のウェブサイト）でも確認できます．より詳細な情報はコチラ2025年11月6日（木）(ダブルヘッダー)場所: 東京大学大学院数理科学研究科　数理科学研究科棟（駒場）128号室講師:  Mo Dick Wong 氏　時間: 14:00 - 15:30Title:  On the limiting distribution of partial sums of random multiplicative functionsAbstract: Consider a random walk associated with a Steinhaus multiplicative function (i.e. the increments are completely multiplicative and uniformly distributed on the complex unit circle): what can we say about its asymptotic behaviour? In his seminal work, Harper resolved a conjecture of Helson by showing that low fractional moments exhibit better-than-square-root cancellation, but the asymptotic distribution remained a mystery and was left as an open problem. In this talk, I will first explain some history and the number-theoretic motivations behind this model, and then present a central limit theorem that features a nonstandard renormalisation as well as a random variance described by the Riemann Zeta function on the critical line. I will highlight the probabilistic aspects of our proof, and in particular discuss a universality result for critical non-Gaussian multiplicative chaos. This is based on joint work with Ofir Gorodetsky.講師:  Robert Griffiths 氏　時間: 16:00 - 17:30Title: de Finetti Random Walks on a Hypercube and Gaussian FieldsAbstract:　 This talk will discuss a random walk on the infinite hypercube:X_{t+1} = X_t + Z_t (mod 2).The increments (Z_t) are i.i.d. with entries that form an infinite exchangeable {0,1} sequence, a de Finetti sequence. There is geometric killing in the random walk. A Gaussian free field (g_x) for x in {0,1}^∞ is associated with the random walk by taking the covariance function to be proportional to the Green function of the random walk. The Green function and a strong representation for (g_x) are characterized by a negative binomial point process which involves the de Finetti measure of the increments of the random walk. 2025年11月10日（月）講師: 濱口　雄史　氏　（京都大学）時間: 16:00 - 17:30 場所: 東京大学大学院数理科学研究科　数理科学研究科棟（駒場）126号室Title: 確率ヴォルテラ方程式のマルコフリフトの弱エルゴード性Abstract: 確率ヴォルテラ方程式の解は一般に非マルコフかつ非セミマルチンゲールであるような(有限次元)確率過程であるが、無限次元空間への持ち上げを考えることで、あるヒルベルト空間上のマルコフ過程(マルコフリフト)が得られる。また、元の確率ヴォルテラ方程式の解は、このマルコフリフトのある種の射影として復元できる。本研究の目的は、マルコフリフトの長時間漸近挙動を調べ、元の確率ヴォルテラ方程式の解に関する極限定理を得ることである。そのうえで解決すべき難点は、マルコフリフトが満たす確率発展方程式が退化型であること、すなわち状態空間は無限次元であるが、ノイズを駆動するブラウン運動は有限次元であるという点である。前回の東京確率論セミナー(2023年6月19日)では、マルコフリフトの漸近的対数ハルナック不等式、特に不変確率測度の一意性に関する結果を報告した。本講演では、マルコフリフトの不変確率測度の存在性と指数型弱エルゴ―ド評価について、現在までに得られた研究成果を報告する。2025年11月17日（月）講師: Gordon Slade 氏 (UBC)時間: 16:00 - 17:30 場所:  西早稲田キャンパス51号館18階の18-06号室Title:Convergence of the lace expansionAbstract:The lace expansion is a flexible method that has been used since the1980s to analyse the critical behaviour of high-dimensional randomsystems, including self-avoiding walk, percolation, and spin models. Itoriginated in work of Brydges and Spencer on weakly self-avoiding walk in dimensions above 4, and since then several different approaches have been developed to prove convergence of the expansion. I will brieflydescribe the lace expansion for self-avoiding walk, and then present anew and relatively simple method for proving convergence of the laceexpansion for weakly self-avoiding walk.The talk is based on Ann. Inst. H. Poincaré Probab. Statist., 58:26-33,(2022).  Extensions of the method were subsequently obtained in jointwork with Yucheng Liu:https://doi.org/10.1007/s00440-024-01350-9  (PTRF 2024)and arXiv:2310.07640 (AIHP to appear)2025年11月24日（月）講師: Amir Dembo 氏 (Stanford)時間: 16:00 - 17:30 場所: 西早稲田キャンパス51号館18階の18-06号室Title:Abstract:2025年12月1日（月）講師: 仮確定時間: 16:00 - 17:30 場所: Title:Abstract:2025年1月14日（水）講師: 仮確定時間: 16:00 - 17:30 場所: Title:Abstract:2025年1月19日（月）講師: 仮確定時間: 16:00 - 17:30 場所: Title:Abstract:2025年1月26日（月）講師: 仮確定時間: 16:00 - 17:30 場所: Title:Abstract:終了したセミナー2025年10月20日（月）講師: 大泉　嶺　氏　（厚生労働省,  国立社会保障・人口問題研究所）時間: 16:00 - 17:30 場所: 東京大学大学院数理科学研究科　数理科学研究科棟（駒場）126号室Title:　Fredholm Integral Equations and Eigenstructure: Genealogical Expansions via Non–Hilbert–Schmidt SolutionsAbstract:　Fredholm integral equations play a central role in describing the long-term behavior of structured population models. In this talk, I present a determinant-free approach that constructs eigenfunctions through genealogical expansions, valid even beyond the Hilbert–Schmidt setting. The expansion is closely related to taboo probabilities in Markov chains, allowing eigenfunctions to be interpreted as cumulative ancestral contributions. As an application, I discuss age-structured branching processes and show how quantities such as expected generation counts and reproduction numbers naturally arise from the eigenvalue problem. This perspective highlights how eigenstructure encodes genealogical memory and opens connections between population dynamics, probability theory, and evolutionary processes.2025年10月9日（木）（ダブルヘッダー）場所:　早稲田大学 51号館18階の18-06号室講師: Rongjuan Fang氏  (Fujian Normal University and Waseda University)時間: 15:00 - 16: 00 Title: Continuous-state branching processes in varying environments  Abstract: Branching processes in varying environments are time-inhomogeneous Markov processes with the branching property. In this talk, we give a construction of a continuous-state branching process in varying environments by the pathwise unique solution to a stochastic integral equation driven by time-space noises. Moreover, we obtain a scaling limit theorem for discrete Galton-Watson processes in varying environments. Based on the time-inhomogeneous model, we also consider the construction of the continuous-state branching process in random environment. This is a joint work with Professor Zenghu Li and Jiawei Liu.講師: Panki Kim 氏 　（Seoul National University）時間: 16:30 - 17: 30 Title:  Heat kernel estimates for Dirichlet forms degenerate at the boundaryAbstract: In this talk, we discuss estimates on the heat kernels of discontinuous symmetric Markov processes including ones with jump kernels degenerate at the boundary. Depending on the regions where the parameters belong, the heat kernels estimates have three different forms, two of them are qualitatively different from all previously known heat kernel estimates. We also discuss  the processes killed either by a critical potential or upon hitting the boundary. Their heat kernel estimates have the approximate factorization property with survival probabilities decaying as a power of the distance to the boundary, where the power depends on the critical potential. bstrac2025年10月6日（月）講師: 河備 浩司  氏 (慶應義塾大学)時間: 16:30 - 18: 00 場所: 東京大学大学院数理科学研究科　数理科学研究科棟（駒場）126号室Title: Riemann多様体上の排他過程に対する流体力学極限Abstract: (コンパクトとは限らない)完備なRiemann多様体をグラフで離散化し, その上の排他過程に対するスケール極限を考察する。本講演では,  石渡 聡 氏 (山形大学), 角田 謙吉 氏 (九州大学)と現在進行中の共同研究に基づき, 流体力学極限について得られた成果を報告する。2025年7月31日（木）講師: Xinyi Li 氏時間: 16:00 - 17:30 場所: 東京大学大学院数理科学研究科　数理科学研究科棟（駒場）128号室Title: Analyticity of 3D Brownian intersection exponentsAbstract: In this talk, we will discuss the boundary Harnack principle (BHP) of the domain in \mathbb{R}^3 with the trace of a 3D Brownian motion removed and how it implies the analyticity of the intersection exponents for 3D Brownian motion. Based on a joint work (available at arXiv:2411.14921) with Yifan Gao (CityU HK), Yifan Li, Runsheng Liu and Xiangyi Liu (PKU).2025年7月28日（月）講師: 江崎 翔太 氏時間: 16:00 - 17:30 場所: 東京大学大学院数理科学研究科　数理科学研究科棟（駒場）126号室Title: Difference between n-dimensional Cauchy distribution and n-times product of Cauchy distribution from perspective of measure concentrationAbstract: 確率解析と測度距離幾何学はそれぞれにおいて広く研究されているが，お互いの関わりはまだ深いとは言えない．ところが，両者ともに，極限定理，特に測度集中現象を通して深く関わりあうと考えることができる．本講演では確率論的な模型である多次元コーシー分布, または, 1次元コーシー分布の直積に基づく測度集中現象について述べ、それらの測度距離幾何的な相違点について述べる. 時間が許した場合には, これらに対応する安定分布の結果についても紹介する. この講演は東京都立大学の数川大輔氏と福岡大学の三石史人氏との共同研究に基づく．2025年7月14日（月）講師: 名古路 浩辰 氏時間: 16:00 - 17:30 場所: 東京大学大学院数理科学研究科　数理科学研究科棟（駒場）126号室Title: Singularity of solutions to singular SPDEsAbstract: We give a sufficient condition for the marginal distribution of the solution to singular SPDEs on the $d$-dimensional torus to be singular with respect to the law of the Gaussian measure induced by the corresponding linear equation. As applications we obtain the singularity of the $\phi^4_3$-quantum field measure with respect to the Gaussian free field measure and the border of parameters for the fractional $\phi^4$-measure to be singular with respect to the base Gaussian measure. Our approach is applicable to quite a large class of singular SPDEs. This talk is based on a joint work with S. Kusuoka (Kyoto University) and M. Hairer (EPFL).2025年7月7日（月）講師: 髙野 凌史 氏時間: 16:00 - 17:30 場所: 東京大学大学院数理科学研究科　数理科学研究科棟（駒場）126号室Title: A semigroup approach to the reconstruction theorem for singular modelled distributions and its applicationAbstract: In our recent research, we extended a semigroup approach used in Otto & Weber (2019) and Hoshino (2023) to provide an alternative proof of the reconstruction theorem for singular modelled distributions. As an application, we constructed a local-in-time solution to the two-dimensional parabolic Anderson model with a non-translation-invariant differential operator. In this talk, I will introduce the idea of constructing solutions to singular SPDEs based on the theory of regularity structures and highlight the differences between our approach and previous works. I will then present main results of our study. This talk is based on joint work with Masato Hoshino (Institute of Science Tokyo).2025年7月3日（木）（応用解析セミナーと合同開催）講師: Jessica Lin 氏 (McGill University)時間: 16:00 - 17:30 場所: 東京大学大学院数理科学研究科　数理科学研究科棟（駒場）128号室Title: Generalized Front Propagation for Stochastic Spatial ModelsAbstract: In this talk, I will present a general framework which can be used to analyze the scaling limits of various stochastic spatial "population" models. Such models include ternary Branching Brownian motion subject to majority voting and several interacting particle systems motivated by biology. The approach is based on moment duality and a PDE methodology introduced by Barles and Souganidis, which can be used to study the asymptotic behaviour of rescaled reaction-diffusion equations. In the limit, the models exhibit phase separation with an evolving interface which is governed by a global-in-time, generalized notion of mean-curvature flow. This talk is based on joint work with Thomas Hughes (University of Bath).2025年6月30日（月）講師: Hugo Da Cunha 氏 (Université Lyon 1)時間: 16:00 - 17:30 場所: 東京大学大学院数理科学研究科　数理科学研究科棟（駒場）126号室Title: Boundary effects in the Facilitated Exclusion ProcessAbstract: The Facilitated Exclusion Process (FEP) is a model of stochastic interacting particle system whose dynamics is subject to kinetic constraints, leading to a phase transition at the critical density 1/2: under this threshold, the system is completely frozen. In recent years, the FEP has been extensively studied on the periodic setting, but in this talk I will consider it with boundary conditions. I will focus first on open boundaries, with particles reservoirs at both ends allowing creation/annihilation of particles. If time allows, I will also consider the case of closed boundaries, when there are impermeable walls at both ends.At the macroscopic level, the boundary dynamics impose some boundary conditions on the PDE describing the hydrodynamic limit, that can be of different types (such as Dirichlet, Neumann or Robin). These boundary conditions are not standard as they differ from what is usually found in other exclusion processes, and this is due to the two-phased nature of FEP.This talk is based on joint works with Clément Erignoux, Marielle Simon and Lu Xu.2025年6月23日（月）講師: Lu-Jing Huang 氏時間: 16:00 - 17:30 場所：西早稲田キャンパスの51号館18階18-06号室 Title: The polynomial growth of effective resistances in one-dimensional critical long-range percolationAbstract: We study the critical long-range percolation on $\mathbb{Z}$, where an edge connects $i$ and $j$ independently with probability $1-\exp\{-\beta\int_i^{i+1}\int_j^{j+1}|u-v|^{-2}\d u\d v\}$ for $|i-j|>1$ for some fixed $\beta>0$ and with probability 1 for $|i-j|=1$. Viewing this as a random electric network where each edge has a unit conductance, we show that the effective resistances from 0 to $[-n,n]^c$ and from the interval $[-n,n]$ to $[-2n,2n]^c$ (conditioned on no edge joining $[-n,n]$ and $[-2n,2n]^c$)  both grow like $n^{\delta(\beta)}$ for some $\delta(\beta)\in (0,1)$.2025年６月９日（月）講師: 角田 謙吉氏時間: 17:00 - 18:30 場所：東京大学大学院数理科学研究科　数理科学研究科棟（駒場）126号室Title: 粒子系に対する静的な揺らぎAbstract: 非平衡定常状態は数理物理の問題として様々な文脈の中で研究されている。非平衡定常状態とはカレントは0でないが時間に対して不変な状態であり、相互作用粒子系においては系の定常測度として定義される。非平衡定常状態の解析で難しい問題点として、その明示的な具体形が知られていないことや定常測度が粒子系に対して可逆でないことなどがあげられる。そのため非平衡定常状態の解析は容易ではないが、一般的な手法として対応するdynamicsに対する解析を用いる方法がある。本講演では粒子数密度に対する揺らぎの問題について焦点を当て、境界で流入・流出のある排他過程やGlauber+Kawasaki過程に対してその手法を解説する。2025年６月２日（月）講師: Wai-Kit Lam 氏時間: 16:00 - 17:30 場所：東京大学大学院数理科学研究科　数理科学研究科棟（駒場）126号室Title:Disorder monomer-dimer model and maximum weight matching Abstract: Given a finite graph, one puts i.i.d. weights on the edges and i.i.d. weights on the vertices. For a (partial) matching on this graph, define the weight of the matching by adding all the weights of the edges in the matching together with the weights of the unmatched vertices. One would like to understand how the maximum weight behaves as the size of the graph becomes large. The talk will be divided into two parts. In the first part, we consider the "positive temperature" case (a.k.a. the disorder monomer-dimer model). We show that the model exhibits correlation decay, and from this one can prove a Gaussian central limit theorem for the associated free energy. In the second part, we will focus on the "zero temperature" case, the maximum weight matching. We show that if the edge weights are exponentially distributed, and if the vertex weights are absent, then there is also correlation decay for a certain class of graphs. This correlation decay allows us to define the maximum weight matching on some infinite graphs and also prove limit theorems for the maximum weight matching. Joint work with Arnab Sen (Minnesota).早稲田数学応数談話会2025年5月26日（月）講師: Grégoire Allaire氏時間: 16:00 - 17:30 場所：早稲田大学西早稲田キャンパス 62号館1階大会議室Title: Long time homogenization of the wave equation in periodic mediaAbstract: We report on a joint work with A. Lamacz-Keymling and J. Rauch. We study the homogenization of the wave equation in a periodic medium for long times of the order of any inverse power of the period. The unknown can be either a scalar or a vector field, while the coefficients can be purely periodic or locallyperiodic tensors. We obtain high order homogenized equations which include dispersive corrections that are crucial for long time accuracy. Our main tools are (i) a so-called "criminal ansatz", which generalizes to the hyperbolic setting an idea of Bakhavalov and Panasenko in the elliptic setting, (ii) an elimination process for the higher order time derivatives in the high order homogenization equation, (iii) a stability estimate for the corresponding homogenized solutions, based on frequency filtering(iv) an error estimate valid for any long times. The importance of considering high order homogenized equations to catch dispersive effects in the context of the wave equation was first recognized by Santosa and Symes and rigorously analyzed by Lamacz. Our work gives a systematic and complete analysis for all time scales and all high order corrective terms.https://www.math.sci.waseda.ac.jp/math/activities/2025年5月14日（水）講師: Franco Flandoli 氏時間: 16:30 - 18:30 場所：西早稲田キャンパスの51号館18階18-06号室Title: Reducing stochastic models in Climate, fluctuating Hydrodynamics and turbulent transportAbstract:  Many systems, taking the scaling limit in a parameter, converge to a deterministic limit equation. Examples are fast-slow systems in climate and their limit averaging equation; interacting particle systems and their mean field or hydrodynamic limit; stochastic turbulent transport and their diffusive limit, similar to diffusion limit in homogenisation. One could however stop before taking the limit and look for a simplified stochastic model, similar to the limit model but stochastic, which well represents the approximating problem without completely neglecting the fluctuations. This was the viewpoint in particular of Hasselmann proposal in climate modelling, here reviewed in comparison with Dean-Kawasaki approach to fluctuating hydrodynamics, with a detour on stochastic transport. The activities mentioned herein are performed in the framework of the European Research Council Project NoisyFluids 101053472.2025年5月12日（月）講師: 長田博文氏　時間: 14:00 - 15:30 場所：東京大学大学院数理科学研究科　数理科学研究科棟（駒場）126号室Title:クーロン点過程の対数微分に対する明示表現とその応用 (Explicit formula to logarithmic derivatives of Coulomb random point fields and their applications)Abstract: Coulomb点過程とは、d次元Coulomb ポテンシャルで相互作用するd次元空間の無限粒子系である。対数微分とは、個々の粒子が、相互作用によって、他の（無限個の）粒子から受ける力を表すベクトル場である。各粒子は対数微分に従って運動する。一般に、対数微分が存在すれば、確率力学が存在することが共著者によって証明されている。本講演は、クーロン点過程の対数微分の存在を証明し、更に、明示表現を構築する。明示表現の応用として、対応する無限次元確率微分方程式のパスワイズ一意の強解の存在を証明する。これを、2次元以上のすべての次元の、すべての正の逆温度に対して行う。Gibbs測度の理論は、1970年ごろ、DLR方程式を基に確立した。しかし、Ruelle族という、遠方での可積分性を持つ干渉ポテンシャルに適用範囲が限られていた。自然界の最も基本的なポテンシャルであるCoulombポテンシャルが、Gibbs測度の理論からずっと長い間、除外されてきた。本明示表現の応用として、Coulombポテンシャルを含む、強い遠距離相互作用を持つ点過程の広いクラスに対して有効な、干渉ポテンシャルと点過程を結び付ける方程式（定式化）を与える。これは、DLR方程式の役割を、CoulombやRieszポテンシャルという、遠距離強相互作用に対して果たすものである。2025年5月12日（月）講師: Alejandro Ramirez氏時間: 16:15 - 17:45 場所：東京大学大学院数理科学研究科　数理科学研究科棟（駒場）126号室Title: GUE fluctuations near the time axis of the one-sided ballistic deposition modelAbstract: Ballistic deposition is a model of interface growth introduced by Vold in 1959, which has remained largely mathematically intractable. It is believed that  it is in the KPZ universality class.  We introduce the one-sided ballistic deposition model, in which vertically falling blocks can only stick to the top or the upper right corner of growing columns, but not to the upper left corners of growing columns as in ballistic deposition.  We establish that strong KPZ universality holds near the time axis, proving that the fluctuations of the height function there are given by the Tracy-Widom GUE distribution. The proof is based on a graphical construction of the process in terms of a last passage percolation model. This is a joint work with Pablo Groisman, Santiago Saglietti and Sebastián Zaninovich.2025年5月7日（水）講師: Ivan Corwin氏時間: 10:00 - 11:30 場所：東京大学大学院数理科学研究科　数理科学研究科棟（駒場）126号室Title: How Yang-Baxter unravels Kardar-Parisi-Zhang.Abstract: Over the past few decades, physicists and then mathematicians have sought to uncover the (conjecturally) universal long time and large space scaling limit for the so-called Kardar-Parisi-Zhang (KPZ) class of stochastically growing interfaces in (1+1)-dimensions. Progress has been marked by several breakthroughs, starting with the identification of a few free-fermionic integrable models in this class and their single-point limiting distributions, widening the field to include non-free-fermionic integrable representatives, evaluating their asymptotics distributions at various levels of generality, constructing the conjectural full space-time scaling limit, known as the directed landscape, and checking convergence to it for a few of the free-fermion representatives.In this talk, I will describe a method that should prove convergence for all known integrable representatives of the KPZ class to this universal scaling limit. The method has been fully realized for the Asymmetric Simple Exclusion Process and the Stochastic Six Vertex Model. It relies on the Yang-Baxter equation as its only input and unravels the rich complexity of the KPZ class and its asymptotics from first principles. This is based on three works involving Amol Aggarwal, Alexei Borodin, Milind Hegde, Jiaoyang Huang and me.2025年4月28日（月）講師 檜垣 充朗氏時間: 16:00 - 17:30 場所：東京大学大学院数理科学研究科　数理科学研究科棟（駒場）126号室Title: ランダム粗面領域における粘性流体に対するナヴィエ壁法則Abstract: 粗面を伴う領域における粘性流体運動の有効近似を得る経験的な手法として、工学分野では壁法則が知られてきた [cf. Nikuradse 1933]。筒状粗面領域における定常層流に対しては、壁法則により、ナヴィエ滑り境界条件に従う速度場が得られる (ナヴィエ壁法則)。本講演では、これが実際に有効近似を与えることを数学的に厳密に証明する。より正確には、粗面領域全体の標本空間を考えた際に、ある種のエルゴード性の仮定の下で、最適な近似率が得られることを報告する。証明の鍵は、粗面付近の流体運動を記述する境界層の確定的/確率的評価である。ここで我々は楕円型方程式に対する定量的確率均質化のアイディアを用いる [cf. Armstrong-Smart, Armstrong-Kuusi-Mourrat, Gloria-Neukamm-Otto, Shen]。ただし、係数行列ではなく粗面領域の標本空間を考えていることに注意されたい。なお、上述のエルゴード性としては、確率変数に対する関数不等式 (対数ソボレフ不等式やスペクトルギャップ不等式など) の成立を採用する。本講演の内容は Jinping Zhuge 氏 (Morningside Center of Mathematics, China)、Yulong Lu 氏 (University of Minnesota, USA) との共同研究に基づく。2025年4月21日（月）講師 蛯名 真久 氏時間: 16:00 - 17:30 場所：東京大学大学院数理科学研究科　数理科学研究科棟（駒場）126号室タイトル　Malliavin-Stein approach to local limit theoremsアブストラクト　Malliavin-Stein's method is a fruitful combination of the Malliavin calculus and Stein's method. It provides a powerful probabilistic technique for establishing the quantitative central limit theorems, particularly for functionals of Gaussian processes. In this talk, we will see how the theory of generalized functionals in the Malliavin calculus can be combined with Malliavin-Stein's method to obtain quantitative local central limit theorems. If time allows, we will also discuss some applications to Wiener chaos. Part of this talk is based on the ongoing joint research with Ivan Nourdin and Giovanni Peccati. 2025年4月14日（月）講師: 星野壮登 氏時間: 16:00 - 17:30場所: 東京大学大学院数理科学研究科　数理科学研究科棟（駒場）126号室Title: On the proofs of BPHZ theorem and future progressAbstract: Hairer’s theory of regularity structures (2014) provides a robust framework to guarantee the renormalizability of stochastic partial differential equations (SPDEs). This theory is established in several steps, among which the final and most technically involved step is the proof of the so-called "BPHZ theorem." There are two main approaches to this proof: a graph-theoretic approach developed by Chandra and Hairer (2016+), and a Malliavin calculus-based inductive approach introduced by Linares, Otto, Tempelmayr, and Tsatsoulis (2024). As for Gaussian noises, the latter is simpler and more inductive. While the language used by Otto and his coauthors is different from that of regularity structures, similar arguments have been formulated in the language of regularity structures by Hairer and Steele (2024) and Bailleul and Hoshino (2023+) by different approaches. In this talk, I will first give an overview of the theory of regularity structures, then compare the outlines of the proofs of BPHZ theorem. If time permits, I will also discuss some current researches and future problems.Google SitesReport abuseGoogle SitesReport abuse